Conditional types have a special
tool called the infer keyword,
which can be used to extract some sub
part of one type from another type.
And it's not a coincidence
that in the same release of
TypeScript where we got conditional types.
We also got this infer
keyword you might feel,
especially once you get used to
using infer, you might feel that
conditional types are sort of a very
weak feature of the language.
Without this infer keyword,
it's almost like this.
This is a necessary part of the story and
they go hand in hand
with conditional types.
This infer keyword can only be used within
the condition expression of a conditional
type it can be used anywhere else
in any kind of type expression.
So, what we're gonna do since
it's kind of an abstract concept,
we're going to walk through
a situation where we find that.
The thing infer does for us is
conspicuously missing from the language
won't go up to a problem that only
this new language feature could solve.
And that'll help us understand how it ties
into the practicalities of what we're
trying to build in our
In our real world apps.
So, let's say that we have a class that
takes a really complicated options object.
And we'll say that it's
called WebpackCompiler.
And this is actually a subset of
the Webpack configuration object.
You don't need to remember all this,
the whole point of having types is
you want autocompletes here, right?
Cuz it's very, very flexible, like you
can do a lot of different things here.
But let's imagine that in the source code
that we're consuming, it looks just like
this, where we do not have an interface or
a type alias that defines this.
We only have it explicitly specified
as the type of the one argument
passed to the constructor, and
then let's say in our own code,
we want something like this
where we define a configuration.
We attempt to compile and
then if something goes wrong,
we log an error message out.
And the configuration is
part of that error message.
Maybe this code is run on a machine
that we don't have direct access to.
And it's important that we
be able in logs to see that.
Like if it's a GitHub action, for example,
we want to be able to see in the logs like
this was a failure here was the config.
I can copy this and I could run it.
So I simply mean to convince you that This
is something you might actually do, right?
And unfortunately,
we have a spelling error here.
We've said watch instead of wutch,
and we get no type checking
help with this spelling error.
Why?
Well, let's look at the type
of this configure object.
It's not anything that looks
connected to the Webpack config.
It's just an object that
has two properties on it.
We're just getting straight up
inference here, based on the value or
we're setting CFG to and we're
passing it In the WebpackCompiler and
nothing's objecting there why
almost everything on this options
object is optional, and we have an entry.
That'll work.
And the other property
will just be disregarded.
So, we want TypeScript to be
able to help us out here.
But we can't do this right now.
Like if there was something else to
import, maybe we could import it,
we could use a type annotation here, and
then it would start to catch our error.
But as I said before,
in this case, like all we have is,
there's this class that I'm using and
has a constructor.
And the first argument of
the constructor wants this thing.
So we want to basically pull this
type out somehow get a handle on
it locally in our app code or
our library code, we want to be able
to give it a name and refer to it and
use it as the type for variables.
As if we just obtained it as an interface.
So this is our goal.
We want something like that.
Something named that we can refer to,
we just gotta get a handle on it first.
And the infer keyword is what's
going to let us do this.
So it lets us abstract some piece
of a type from a larger type.
And before we go back to our Webpack
example, which is very complicated,
just the nature of that
type is complicated.
I want to work on an example that
has the same approximate structure
meaning it still is a one
argument constructor.
And we still want to obtain this thing,
but
all of the other noises is out and
I think that if we solve this problem,
we will also solve the same problem
in the WebpackCompiler example.
So we want to design some sort of
type that takes fruit stand or
some variant of it as a type parameter.
And it emits array of strings.
Right like, here's a class.
Give me the first argument that the
compiler or that the constructor receives.
So this is actually the answer here and
it looks quite complicated.
We're going to pick it apart.
You will understand every little
piece of this syntax, but
first I want you to accept that it works.
So we've got this,
this is sort of the answer here.
We've got this fruit stand thing.
And we've got like constructor Arg
we pass in type of FruitStand.
And what do we get out?
The first argument that
the constructor takes.
Here's our WebpackCompiler example.
We pass in type of that, and we get out.
That's the type that we
wanted this whole time.
We wanted to sort of, grab that
first argument, give it a name and
we could Give this a name like
this with the type alias,
we could call it WebpackCompiler
options if we want to.
So this appears to work, it does work.
Let's pick apart what all
this stuff means here.
So first we're just gonna
build it up piece by piece.
First we have a type alias and
we're calling it constructor Arg.
It takes a single type parameter,
which we're calling C.
It's gonna be C for class.
Next, we want to create
a conditional type and,
we're gonna be analyzing
the static side of a class,
which is that's why up here,
we're using type of right.
That's to get the type of the class,
not a type of the instance.
And we want, To match that against
something like this, right,
this again is our any constructor type,
right?
This is this represents anything in
JavaScript that is newable regardless
of how many arguments it may take,
regardless of what it instantiates.
If you want to know more specific newable.
You might put something over here,
like any constructor that makes dates.
Well, that's gonna be
the date constructor.
So, we started with this.
So all we've added is
the condition portion of
what will become a conditional type.
So this is we've already learned about
this right we have our type puram.
We're testing whether
the type that C represents
is included in the set
that this represents.
So is C in the set of all
things that are newable.
Now, we're about to make a little change
that will make this a more specific type.
But we want to collect that first
constructor argument that this is where
the infer keyword enters into the story.
So we're going to change from
accepting any arbitrary list of
arguments to accepting a first
argument which must be there and
we're adding something here it looks
like it's a new type parameter kind of,
it doesn't it's not going to end up having
to be part of our type parameter list.
But typically we still use title case for
this, right?
And infer is to the left of it.
So you can think of this almost like it's
like a vacuum the end of a vacuum, right?
We're gonna suck up whatever's here and
call it A and
after a we're prepared to have zero or
more other arguments.
We don't really care about those.
But to maintain the flexibility of
this thing that we're building will
tolerate other arguments.
You don't have to give us exactly
a one argument instructor.
Are our constructor we just want
the first argument of any constructor.
Now, the more keen eyed of you may notice,
this is actually we've made
this type more specific.
So if we let me get both of
these on the screen here,
this type matches any newable,
including zero argument constructors.
This, you're gonna have to
have one argument, right?
This has to be present.
I'm okay with that in this situation
because the whole point is we're trying to
obtain that.
So if it sort of Nevers out, right,
it sort of grounds out in the case where
we use it with zero
argument constructors like.
I would say that it's
a sign of misuse anyway,
and that would be a reasonable result.
There was nothing to obtain, so never.
Right.
So this is our condition here and
now all that's left is for
us to fill in what are we emit?
What type do we evaluate out
to if the condition It's true.
And what do we evaluate
out to if it's false.
So in the case where our
condition evaluates to true,
we're able to use this type A,
just as if it were a type parameter.
So you can think of this kind
of like it's in scope, right?
You could use a here or
you could use it here.
But it's not just a placeholder
like a label just so
we can give this thing a name.
So when people read our code,
they can understand what's going on.
We suck this up with our vacuum,
and we can put it out here.
Right?
So we're saying if C, is a newable.
Suck up that first argument that's passed
to the constructor and give me its type.
Now we need to put something here.
And a good way to think about
how we handle the other case,
right the case where we
turn up with nothing.
We want to make sure that if
we use this with a union type,
with the or type It kind of disappears.
And what I mean by that is whatever
type we end up with here, right?
Like if we evaluate out to this case,
let's say that's x.
I want wanna make sure that when we
we evaluate an expression like this,
we end up with just a string or number it
kinda just, it's like multiplying by one,
like just an identity thing where
it's sort of like vanishes.
That'll ensure that we're not adding noise
whenever this type sort of plays with
other types.
So we can try that with any and
look what happens
when we do union any it
swallows everything.
Union any always swallows everything.
The way I think about this,
it's like if you send your friend
to go to the grocery store.
You're saying pick up three organic eggs,
and 25 grams of some spice.
And also get me everything
in the store please.
Well, you could have
just led with that right?
You could have just said,
give me everything in the store.
That's why this swallows everything.
It's kind of like multiplying
by zero in some way,
in that if this is found in a union type,
if you ever see this,
it just makes the whole rest
of the union type pointless
because it's just going
to evaluate out to any.
So not only is this the wrong answer,
this is not what we desire.
It's like the exact
opposite of what we desire.
We want something that disappears,
not something that dominates over and
kind of takes over.
The whole type.
So if this gives us the exact
opposite of what we're looking for,
it makes sense to me to try
the opposite of any, right?
So we're going to try this with never,
and we in fact do get what we want.
So when you're making
these conditional types,
in the case where
something didn't match and
you kind of just want to like escape
out let's just like forget about it.
Often you're just gonna want to admit and
never type.
Because that well, when used in a union
type like this it will just disappear.
No noise, so
let's apply that to our constructor,
our extractor, and
we can see this is the answer.
This is what we ended up with.
So just again, to recap,
it's a generic type that takes a type
parameter C, we look at sea and
we see If it's a newable, and
if that newable takes at least
one argument, we have a match.
And in the event that we have a match,
we're going to use our infer
keyword which is like a vacuum.
We're gonna suck up whatever's
in that first argument, and
we're going to put it in a box called A.
And then, in the event that we had
a match, we will always enter this branch.
So you're always going
to enter this branch,
which is why you're gonna
wanna use eight here.
Often down here,
you could put another ternary operator,
you could chain these together.
And you could say, well if it's a one
argument constructor, we do this.
Maybe if it's a two argument constructor,
we build a tuple with the two things.
You can sort of chain these together.
It's normal by the way to
see this chaining because,
unlike in the value based JavaScript
world, there is no more verbose and
explicit equivalent to
the ternary operator.
We can't like expand this
out into if then else.
I know that some people don't like
nested ternary is for that reason.
So finally let's look
at at the result here.
So no matter what we use this type with,
we can see that we get
the result we're looking for.
We get the first argument
the constructor takes.
So you can create a new date
like literally new date.
You can pass it a string,
a date as a string, a number,
which is like milliseconds
since the epoch.
And then you could create a date from
another date here is the resolve and
reject.
you're used to seeing in
a promise constructor.
Here's our Webpack config.
So now we have this ability to using
infer, to suck up a part of a type and
to obtain it and to create maybe
a local reference to it in some way,
taking this all the way
to the finish line.
If we go back to our first example,
our motivating use case where
we had the spelling error, and
instead of just creating this object with
inference taking care of the typing,
we add this here we give it
an explicit type annotation.
As we've done right up here,
we can see that not only do we get
an error where we hoped
we would get an error.
TypeScript is found that
there is a watch property and
the word we used is pretty close to watch.
So maybe it's a spelling error.
Even guessing that it might
be just a spelling mistake.
So there you go.
This is a great use of the infer keyword.
And I use it all the time for
this exact use case.
Where I'm consuming some code and
I wish I could obtain this type maybe
because just for logging reasons or
something, I want to like create the
things that I'm passing into the function.
First, log that out and then pass it in.
And this is a great way even if those
entities those types are not available for
direct import by whoever made the library.
That doesn't hold you back,
you can still do this.
So, be caution that I want to
give you is in a very large app,
be careful that you don't
do this too too much,
because it's not simple for
the type checker to evaluate.
And if you end up with with too
much of this kind of behavior
here too many conditional types,
too much infer you can
end up slowing down your
the speed of your type of heads.
Now that's not I would say
only worried about this if
you start experiencing that problem.
It's not the kind of thing where, you want
to make sure you avoid the problem so
that you don't get out of
control in the first place.
Really, if you're looking to
improve your performance, just make
sure If you're not making like overusing
this this feature of the language.
But totally fair to use totally,
the only tool for the job in many cases.